It has been a decade since the original publication of this book and the trend towards a renewal of realism with which it is concerned has become ever more intense. Young continental philosophers today
	acknowledge that it was in 2002 that a realist ontological stance was openly proclaimed, “the ﬁrst time this has been done with a straight face in the recent continental tradition.”1 In other words, the ﬁrst time that the autonomy of material entities from the human mindwas asserted without any sense of postmodern irony. In the years that followed several forms of continental realism have ﬂourished, grouped together under the term speculative to stress the fact that this autonomous world is not the world of everyday perception and common sense, but that a great
	deal of philosophical work must be performed to reconstruct it from the impoverished version given todirect experience. The different realist positions that have emerged differ precisely in what they postulate must be speculatively added to what is given to yield a richer picture of things and events. Given how recent this “speculative turn” is, the variety of proposals is a welcome antidote to the premature freezing of a single ontological solution to the problem.
	In the present text the necessary enrichment of the world-view is performed by adding to the properties that deﬁne an object’s identity, its tendencies and capacities. Whereas properties are always actual, tendencies and capacities can be real without being actual, if they are not currently manifested or exercised. Thus, the mind-independent identity of a given body of water can be established by determining its actual properties (its volume, purity of composition, temperature, speed of ﬂow) but that determination does not exhausts its reality. Such a body of water may exist presently in the liquid state,but it is part of its reality that at a certain temperature it can become steam or ice,that is, that it has a real tendency to boil or freeze under certain conditions. The fact that it is not in a gaseous or crystalline state at this moment does not make its tendency to become gas or crystal any less real. Similarly, the identity of a body of water is partly determined by its capacity to affect other substances, such as its capacity to dissolve them. The exercise of this capacity demands an actual interaction with acids, alkalis, or salts, but the absence of interactions does not make it any less real.
	Like tendencies, capacities become actual as events, but in this case the events are always double, to dissolve/to be dissolved. The reason is that a capacity to affect must always be coupled to a capacity to be affected:water is a solvent but only when interacting with substances that are soluble in it.
	In the analytical tradition, where the trend towards realism began in the 1980’s, the need to supplement the properties of a mind-independent world with tendencies and capacities is now generally acknowledged.2 Moreover, the effect that this ontological supplementation may have on epistemology has also been explored. In particular, gaining knowledge about objective entities involves creating representations of them as possessors of a set of properties, as well as performing interventions on them with the aim of forcing them to manifest their tendencies, or of getting them to interact with a variety of other entities so that they exhibit their full repertoire of capacities.3 This way, epistemology is liberated from passive observation. Nowhere is this epistemological change more evident than in realist theories of causality. Whereas for idealists causality can be reduced to a concept (transcendental or conventional), and for empiricists it can be reduced to the observed constant conjunction of a cause and its effect, for realists causality is a form of objective synthesis, the production of one event by another event.4 Human interventions in the realm of science share this productive or synthetic aspect of causality.
	Postulating objective tendencies and capacities may not seem
	overly speculative, but this book goes one step beyond that. It offers a new philosophical concept to ground the reality of the non-actual determinants of identity, the concept of the structure of a possibility space. This structure is easier to determine for tendencies than for capacities, since for the former it can bedeﬁned by the mathematics of critical points, like boiling or freezing points. For capacities we need a way of thinking about spaces with a changing number of dimensions, given that what an entity can affect depends on a possibly unlimited number of other entities that can be differently affected by it.5 Moreover, the present text dares to speculate not only about the structure of the possibility spaces associated with actual entities, but also about the relations that thesespaces (or more exactly, their structure) may have with each other. Do they form another dimension of reality, one defying not only observation and representation but also intervention?. Do they form an immanent plane, an ideally continuous space from which actual beings derive as so many discontinuous segments?. The task of making this ideal plane an object of thought goes beyond mathematics and science. It is a deﬁning task for any future realist philosophy.
	Manuel DeLanda. Philosophy and Simulation. (London: Continuum,
	2011).
References
1	Levi Bryant, Nick Srnicek, Graham Harman. Towards a Speculative Philosophy. In The Speculative Turn. Continental Materialism and Realism.
	(Melbourne: re.press, 2011). p. 2.
	The authors cite not only the present text as marking the year 2002 but also Graham Harman’s Tool-Being.
2	Roy Bhaskar. A Realist Theory of Science. (London: Verso, 1997). p. 114.
3	Ian Hacking. Representing and Intervening. (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,1992). p. 46.
4	Mario Bunge. Causality and Modern Science. (New York: Dover, 1979). p. 47.
5	My most ambitious attempt to deﬁne the concept of the structure of possibility spaces, for both tendencies and capacities, is in:
